---
title: "RC18."
excerpt_separator: "<!--more-->"
category: Recurse Center
series-intro: >
  Daily dispatches from my 12 weeks at the Recurse Center in Summer 2023
Tags:
  - Lisp
  - Scheme
Modified: 2023-06-09
---

Today was slightly abridged since [my boy is sick](http://myboyissick.com/), but did manage to get a few things done:
- paired a bit on C for BYOL. We focused on implementing exponentiation in the Lisp parser we're working on. Exponentiaion is a special case, turns out, presuming you want to ensure that the `^` operator takes two and only two arguments. This challenge was a relative of accepting a single argument with the minus operator to negate a number.
- continued my battle with a LeetCode brain-melter of a linked list problem
- had a great coffee chat discussing the extent to which relative comfort/discomfort with infinitude might be generational. This is something I've been wondering about in the context of Breath of the Wild, which is effectively infinite: I suppose theoretically it's possible to bring it to 100% completion, but that seems besides the point for a game so open. I find I am having to come to terms with its exceessive nature and accept that finishing the game and 100% completing it may be two different things -- an uncomfortable thought for someone who grew up with extremely finite games, but one I am getting used to.
- worked on some SICP exercises and generally feeling grateful that next week we're moving on from the math-heavy algos. Not that I dislike them -- it's just that they take me a while.

